.TH SADC 8 "MAY 2008" Linux "Linux User's Manual" -*- nroff -*-
.SH NAME
sadc \- System activity data collector.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /tmp/root-rootfs/lib/sa/sadc [ -C
.I comment
.B ] [ -S { INT | DISK | ALL } ] [ -F ] [ -L ] [ -V ] [
.I interval
.B [
.I count
.B ] ] [
.I outfile
.B ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B sadc
command samples system data a specified number of times (
.I count
) at a specified interval measured in seconds (
.I interval
). It writes in binary format to the specified
.I outfile
or to the standard output. If
.I outfile
is set to -, then
.B sadc
uses the standard system activity daily data file, the
.IR /var/log/sa/sa dd
file, where the dd parameter indicates the current day.
By default
.B sadc
collects all the data available from the kernel.
Exceptions are interrupts and disks data, for which the
relevant options must be explicitly passed to
.B sadc
(see options below).

When the
.I count
parameter is not specified,
.B sadc
writes its data endlessly.
When both
.I interval
and
.I count
are not specified, and option -C is not used,
a dummy record, which is used at system startup to mark
the time when the counter restarts from 0, will be written.
For example, one of the system startup script may write the restart mark to
the daily data file by the command entry:

.B "/tmp/root-rootfs/lib/sa/sadc -"

The
.B sadc
command is intended to be used as a backend to the
.B sar
command.

Note: The
.B sadc
command only reports on local activities.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP "-C comment"
When both the
.I interval
and
.I count
parameters are not specified, tell sadc to write a dummy record containing
a comment specified by the string
.IR comment .
This comment can then be displayed with option -C of
.BR sar .
.IP -F
The creation of
.I outfile
will be forced. If the file already exists and has not the format expected by
.B sadc
then it will be truncated. This may be particularly useful for daily data files
created by an older version of sadc and whose format is no longer compatible
with current one.
.IP -L
.B sadc
will try to get an exclusive lock on the
.I outfile
before writing to it or truncating it. Failure to get the lock is fatal,
except in the case of trying to write a normal (i.e. not a dummy and not
a header) record to an existing file, in which case
.B sadc
will try again at the next interval. Usually, the only reason a lock
would fail would be if another
.B sadc
process were also writing to the file. This can happen when cron is used
to launch
.BR sadc .
If the system is under heavy load, an old
.B sadc
might still be running when cron starts a new one. Without locking,
this situation can result in a corrupted system activity file.
.IP "-S { INT | DISK | ALL }"
Specify which optional activities should be collected by
.BR sadc .
Some activities are optional to prevent data files from growing too large.
The
.B INT
keyword indicates that
.B sadc
should collect data for system interrupts.
The
.B DISK
keyword indicates that
.B sadc
should collect data for block devices.
The
.B ALL
keyword is equivalent to specifying all the keywords above and therefore
all possible activities are collected.
.IP -V
Print version number then exit.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
The
.B sadc
command takes into account the following environment variable:

.IP S_TIME_DEF_TIME
If this variable exists and its value is
.BR UTC
then
.B sadc
will save its data in UTC time.
.B sadc
will also use UTC time instead of local time to determine the current
daily data file located in the
.IR /var/log/sa
directory.
.SH EXAMPLES
.B /tmp/root-rootfs/lib/sa/sadc 1 10 /tmp/datafile
.RS
Write 10 records of one second intervals to the /tmp/datafile binary file.
.RE

.B /tmp/root-rootfs/lib/sa/sadc -C Backup_Start /tmp/datafile
.RS
Insert the comment Backup_Start into the file /tmp/datafile.
.RE
.SH BUGS
.I /proc
filesystem must be mounted for the
.B sadc
command to work.

All the statistics are not necessarily available, depending on the kernel version used.
.SH FILES
.IR /var/log/sa/sa dd
.RS
Indicate the daily data file, where the
.B dd
parameter is a number representing the day of the month.

.RE
.IR /proc
contains various files with system statistics.
.SH AUTHOR
Sebastien Godard (sysstat <at> orange.fr)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sar (1),
.BR sa1 (8),
.BR sa2 (8),
.BR sadf (1),
.BR isag (1)

.I http://pagesperso-orange.fr/sebastien.godard/
