.TH SAR 1 "JULY 2008" Linux "Linux User's Manual" -*- nroff -*-
.SH NAME
sar \- Collect, report, or save system activity information.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sar [ -A ] [ -b ] [ -B ] [ -C ] [ -d ] [ -i
.I interval
.B ] [ -p ] [ -q ] [ -r ] [ -R ] [ -S ] [ -t ] [ -u [ ALL ] ] [ -v ] [ -V ] [ -w ] [ -W ] [ -y ]
.B [ -n { DEV | EDEV | NFS | NFSD | SOCK | ALL } ]
.B [ -I {
.I irq
.B | SUM | ALL | XALL } ] [ -P {
.I cpu
.B | ALL } ] [ -o [
.I filename
.B ] | -f [
.I filename
.B ] ] [ -s [
.I hh:mm:ss
.B ] ] [ -e [
.I hh:mm:ss
.B ] ] [
.I interval
.B [
.I count
.B ] ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B sar
command writes to standard output the contents of selected
cumulative activity counters in the operating system. The accounting
system, based on the values in the
.I count
and
.I interval
parameters, writes information the specified number of times spaced
at the specified intervals in seconds.
If the
.I interval
parameter is set to zero, the
.B sar
command displays the average statistics for the time
since the system was started. If the
.I interval
parameter is specified without the
.I count
parameter, then reports are generated continuously.
The collected data can also
be saved in the file specified by the
.B -o
.I filename
flag, in addition to being displayed onto the screen. If
.I filename
is omitted, sar uses the standard system activity daily data file,
the
.IR /var/log/sa/sa dd
file, where the dd parameter indicates the current day.
By default all the data available from the kernel are saved in the
data file.

The
.B sar
command extracts and writes to standard output records previously
saved in a file. This file can be either the one specified by the
.B -f
flag or, by default, the standard system activity daily data file.

Without the
.B -P
flag, the
.B sar
command reports system-wide (global among all processors) statistics,
which are calculated as averages for values expressed as percentages,
and as sums otherwise. If the
.B -P
flag is given, the
.B sar
command reports activity which relates to the specified processor or
processors. If
.B -P ALL
is given, the
.B sar
command reports statistics for each individual processor and global
statistics among all processors.

You can select information about specific system activities using
flags. Not specifying any flags selects only CPU activity.
Specifying the
.B -A
flag is equivalent to specifying
.BR "-bBdqrRSvwWy -I SUM -I XALL -n ALL -u ALL -P ALL".

The default version of the
.B sar
command (CPU utilization report) might be one of the first facilities
the user runs to begin system activity investigation, because it
monitors major system resources. If CPU utilization is near 100 percent
(user + nice + system), the workload sampled is CPU-bound.

If multiple samples and multiple reports are desired, it is convenient
to specify an output file for the
.B sar
command. 
Run the
.B sar
command as a background process. The syntax for this is:

.B sar -o datafile interval count >/dev/null 2>&1 &

All data is captured in binary form and saved to a file (datafile).
The data can then be selectively displayed with the
.B sar
command using the
.B -f
option. Set the
.I interval
and
.I count
parameters to select
.I count
records at
.I interval
second intervals. If the
.I count
parameter is not set, all the records saved in the
file will be selected.
Collection of data in this manner is useful to characterize
system usage over a period of time and determine peak usage hours.

Note:	The
.B sar
command only reports on local activities.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP -A
This is equivalent to specifying
.BR "-bBdqrRSuvwWy -I SUM -I XALL -n ALL -u ALL -P ALL".
.IP -b
Report I/O and transfer rate statistics.
The following values are displayed:

.B tps
.RS
.RS
Total number of transfers per second that were issued to physical devices.
A transfer is an I/O request to a physical device. Multiple logical
requests can be combined into a single I/O request to the device.
A transfer is of indeterminate size.
.RE

.B rtps
.RS
Total number of read requests per second issued to physical devices.
.RE

.B wtps
.RS
Total number of write requests per second issued to physical devices.
.RE

.B bread/s
.RS
Total amount of data read from the devices in blocks per second.
Blocks are equivalent to sectors with 2.4 kernels and newer
and therefore have a size of 512 bytes. With older kernels, a block is of
indeterminate size.
.RE

.B bwrtn/s
.RS
Total amount of data written to devices in blocks per second.
.RE
.RE
.IP -B
Report paging statistics. Some of the metrics below are available
only with post 2.5 kernels. The following values are displayed:

.B pgpgin/s
.RS
.RS
Total number of kilobytes the system paged in from disk per second.
Note: With old kernels (2.2.x) this value is a number of blocks per
second (and not kilobytes).
.RE

.B pgpgout/s
.RS
Total number of kilobytes the system paged out to disk per second.
Note: With old kernels (2.2.x) this value is a number of blocks per
second (and not kilobytes).
.RE

.B fault/s
.RS
Number of page faults (major + minor) made by the system per second.
This is not a count of page faults that generate I/O, because some page
faults can be resolved without I/O.
.RE

.B majflt/s
.RS
Number of major faults the system has made per second, those which
have required loading a memory page from disk.
.RE

.B pgfree/s
.RS
Number of pages placed on the free list by the system per second.
.RE

.B pgscank/s
.RS
Number of pages scanned by the kswapd daemon per second.
.RE

.B pgscand/s
.RS
Number of pages scanned directly per second.
.RE

.B pgsteal/s
.RS
Number of pages the system has reclaimed from cache (pagecache and
swapcache) per second to satisfy its memory demands.
.RE

.B %vmeff
.RS
Calculated as pgsteal / pgscan, this is a metric of the efficiency of
page reclaim. If it is near 100% then almost every page coming off the
tail of the inactive list is being reaped. If it gets too low (e.g. less
than 30%) then the virtual memory is having some difficulty.
This field is displayed as zero if no pages have been scanned during the
interval of time.
.RE
.RE
.IP -C
When reading data from a file, tell
.B sar
to display comments that have been inserted by
.BR sadc .
.IP -d
Report activity for each block device (kernels 2.4 and newer only).
When data is displayed, the device specification
.I dev m-n
is generally used (
.B DEV
column).
.B m
is the major number of the device.
With recent kernels (post 2.5),
.B n
is the minor number of the device, but is only a sequence number with
pre 2.5 kernels. Device names may also be pretty-printed if option -p
is used (see below). Values for fields avgqu-sz, await, svctm and %util
may be unavailable and displayed as 0.00 with some 2.4 kernels.

.B tps
.RS
.RS
Indicate the number of transfers per second that were issued to the device.
Multiple logical requests can be combined into a single I/O request to the
device. A transfer is of indeterminate size.
.RE

.B rd_sec/s
.RS
Number of sectors read from the device. The size of a sector is 512 bytes.
.RE

.B wr_sec/s
.RS
Number of sectors written to the device. The size of a sector is 512 bytes.
.RE

.B avgrq-sz
.RS
The average size (in sectors) of the requests that were issued to the device.
.RE

.B avgqu-sz
.RS
The average queue length of the requests that were issued to the device.
.RE

.B await
.RS
The average time (in milliseconds) for I/O requests issued to the device
to be served. This includes the time spent by the requests in queue and
the time spent servicing them.
.RE

.B svctm
.RS
The average service time (in milliseconds) for I/O requests that were issued
to the device.
.RE

.B %util
.RS
Percentage of CPU time during which I/O requests were issued to the device
(bandwidth utilization for the device). Device saturation occurs when this
value is close to 100%.
.RE
.RE
.IP "-e [ hh:mm:ss ]"
Set the ending time of the report. The default ending time is
18:00:00. Hours must be given in 24-hour format.
This option can be used when data are read from
or written to a file (options
.B -f
or
.B -o
).
.IP "-f [ filename ]"
Extract records from
.I filename
(created by the
.B -o filename
flag). The default value of the
.B filename
parameter is the current daily data file, the
.IR /var/log/sa/sa dd
file. The -f option is exclusive of the -o option.
.IP "-i interval"
Select data records at seconds as close as possible to the number specified
by the
.I interval
parameter.
.IP "-I { irq | SUM | ALL | XALL }"
Report statistics for a given interrupt.
.B irq
is the interrupt number. Specifying multiple
.B -I irq
parameters on the command line will look at multiple independent interrupts.
The
.B SUM
keyword indicates that the total number of interrupts received per second
is to be displayed. The
.B ALL
keyword indicates that statistics from
the first 16 interrupts are to be reported, whereas the
.B XALL
keyword indicates that statistics from all interrupts, including potential
APIC interrupt sources, are to be reported.
.IP "-n { DEV | EDEV | NFS | NFSD | SOCK | ALL }"
Report network statistics.

With the
.B DEV
keyword, statistics from the network devices are reported.
The following values are displayed:

.B IFACE
.RS
.RS
Name of the network interface for which statistics are reported.
.RE

.B rxpck/s
.RS
Total number of packets received per second.
.RE

.B txpck/s
.RS
Total number of packets transmitted per second.
.RE

.B rxkB/s
.RS
Total number of kilobytes received per second.
.RE

.B txkB/s
.RS
Total number of kilobytes transmitted per second.
.RE

.B rxcmp/s
.RS
Number of compressed packets received per second (for cslip etc.).
.RE

.B txcmp/s
.RS
Number of compressed packets transmitted per second.
.RE

.B rxmcst/s
.RS
Number of multicast packets received per second.
.RE

With the
.B EDEV
keyword, statistics on failures (errors) from the network devices are reported.
The following values are displayed:

.B IFACE
.RS
Name of the network interface for which statistics are reported.
.RE

.B rxerr/s
.RS
Total number of bad packets received per second.
.RE

.B txerr/s
.RS
Total number of errors that happened per second while transmitting packets.
.RE

.B coll/s
.RS
Number of collisions that happened per second while transmitting packets.
.RE

.B rxdrop/s
.RS
Number of received packets dropped per second because of a lack of space in linux buffers.
.RE

.B txdrop/s
.RS
Number of transmitted packets dropped per second because of a lack of space in linux buffers.
.RE

.B txcarr/s
.RS
Number of carrier-errors that happened per second while transmitting packets.
.RE

.B rxfram/s
.RS
Number of frame alignment errors that happened per second on received packets.
.RE

.B rxfifo/s
.RS
Number of FIFO overrun errors that happened per second on received packets.
.RE

.B txfifo/s
.RS
Number of FIFO overrun errors that happened per second on transmitted packets.
.RE

With the
.B NFS
keyword, statistics about NFS client activity are reported.
The following values are displayed:

.B call/s
.RS
Number of RPC requests made per second.
.RE

.B retrans/s
.RS
Number of RPC requests per second, those which needed to be retransmitted (for
example because of a server timeout).
.RE

.B read/s
.RS
Number of 'read' RPC calls made per second.
.RE

.B write/s
.RS
Number of 'write' RPC calls made per second.
.RE

.B access/s
.RS
Number of 'access' RPC calls made per second.
.RE

.B getatt/s
.RS
Number of 'getattr' RPC calls made per second.
.RE

With the
.B NFSD
keyword, statistics about NFS server activity are reported.
The following values are displayed:

.B scall/s
.RS
Number of RPC requests received per second.
.RE

.B badcall/s
.RS
Number of bad RPC requests received per second, those whose
processing generated an error.
.RE

.B packet/s
.RS
Number of network packets received per second.
.RE

.B udp/s
.RS
Number of UDP packets received per second.
.RE

.B tcp/s
.RS
Number of TCP packets received per second.
.RE

.B hit/s
.RS
Number of reply cache hits per second.
.RE

.B miss/s
.RS
Number of reply cache misses per second.
.RE

.B sread/s
.RS
Number of 'read' RPC calls received per second.
.RE

.B swrite/s
.RS
Number of 'write' RPC calls received per second.
.RE

.B saccess/s
.RS
Number of 'access' RPC calls received per second.
.RE

.B sgetatt/s
.RS
Number of 'getattr' RPC calls received per second.
.RE

With the
.B SOCK
keyword, statistics on sockets in use are reported.
The following values are displayed:

.B totsck
.RS
Total number of sockets used by the system.
.RE

.B tcpsck
.RS
Number of TCP sockets currently in use.
.RE

.B udpsck
.RS
Number of UDP sockets currently in use.
.RE

.B rawsck
.RS
Number of RAW sockets currently in use.
.RE

.B ip-frag
.RS
Number of IP fragments currently in use.
.RE

.B tcp-tw
.RS
Number of TCP sockets in TIME_WAIT state.
.RE

The
.B ALL
keyword is equivalent to specifying all the keywords above and therefore all the network
activities are reported.
.RE
.RE
.IP "-o [ filename ]"
Save the readings in the file in binary form. Each reading
is in a separate record. The default value of the
.B filename
parameter is the current daily data file, the
.IR /var/log/sa/sa dd
file. The -o option is exclusive of the -f option.
.IP "-P { cpu | ALL }"
Report per-processor statistics for the specified processor or processors.
Specifying the
.B ALL
keyword reports statistics for each individual processor, and globally for
all processors.
Note that processor 0 is the first processor.
.IP -p
Pretty-print device names. Use this option in conjunction with option -d.
By default names are printed as
.B dev m-n
where m and n are the major and minor numbers for the device.
Use of this option displays the names of the devices as they (should) appear
in /dev. Name mappings are controlled by
.B /etc/sysconfig/sysstat.ioconf.
.IP -q
Report queue length and load averages. The following values are displayed:

.B runq-sz
.RS
.RS
Run queue length (number of tasks waiting for run time). 
.RE

.B plist-sz
.RS
Number of tasks in the task list.
.RE

.B ldavg-1
.RS
System load average for the last minute.
The load average is calculated as the average number of runnable or
running tasks (R state), and the number of tasks in uninterruptible
sleep (D state) over the specified interval.
.RE

.B ldavg-5
.RS
System load average for the past 5 minutes.
.RE

.B ldavg-15
.RS
System load average for the past 15 minutes.
.RE
.RE
.IP -r
Report memory utilization statistics.
The following values are displayed:

.B kbmemfree
.RS
.RS
Amount of free memory available in kilobytes.
.RE

.B kbmemused
.RS
Amount of used memory in kilobytes. This does not take into account memory
used by the kernel itself.
.RE

.B %memused
.RS
Percentage of used memory.
.RE

.B kbbuffers
.RS
Amount of memory used as buffers by the kernel in kilobytes.
.RE

.B kbcached
.RS
Amount of memory used to cache data by the kernel in kilobytes.
.RE

.B kbcommit
.RS
Amount of memory in kilobytes needed for current workload. This is an estimate of how much
RAM/swap is needed to guarantee that there never is out of memory.
.RE

.B %commit
.RS
Percentage of memory needed for current workload in relation to the total amount of memory (RAM+swap).
This number may be greater than 100% because the kernel usually overcommits memory.

.RE
.RE
.IP -R
Report memory statistics. The following values are displayed:

.B frmpg/s
.RS
.RS
Number of memory pages freed by the system per second.
A negative value represents a number of pages allocated by the system.
Note that a page has a size of 4 kB or 8 kB according to the machine architecture.
.RE

.B bufpg/s
.RS
Number of additional memory pages used as buffers by the system per second.
A negative value means fewer pages used as buffers by the system.
.RE

.B campg/s
.RS
Number of additional memory pages cached by the system per second.
A negative value means fewer pages in the cache.
.RE
.RE
.IP "-s [ hh:mm:ss ]"
Set the starting time of the data, causing the
.B sar
command to extract records time-tagged at, or following, the time
specified. The default starting time is 08:00.
Hours must be given in 24-hour format. This option can be
used only when data are read from a file (option
.B -f
).
.IP -S
Report swap space utilization statistics.
The following values are displayed:

.B kbswpfree
.RS
.RS
Amount of free swap space in kilobytes.
.RE

.B kbswpused
.RS
Amount of used swap space in kilobytes.
.RE

.B %swpused
.RS
Percentage of used swap space.
.RE

.B kbswpcad
.RS
Amount of cached swap memory in kilobytes.
This is memory that once was swapped out, is swapped back in
but still also is in the swap area (if memory is needed it doesn't need
to be swapped out again because it is already in the swap area. This
saves I/O).
.RE

.B %swpcad
.RS
Percentage of cached swap memory in relation to the amount of used swap space.
.RE
.RE
.IP -t
When reading data from a daily data file, indicate that
.B sar
should display the timestamps in the original locale time of
the data file creator. Without this option, the
.B sar
command displays the timestamps in the user's locale time.
.IP "-u [ ALL ]"
Report CPU utilization. The
.B ALL
keyword indicates that all the CPU fields should be displayed.
The report may show the following fields:

.B %user
.RS
.RS
Percentage of CPU utilization that occurred while executing at the user
level (application). Note that this field includes time spent running
virtual processors.
.RE

.B %usr
.RS
Percentage of CPU utilization that occurred while executing at the user
level (application). Note that this field does NOT include time spent
running virtual processors.
.RE

.B %nice
.RS
Percentage of CPU utilization that occurred while executing at the user
level with nice priority.
.RE

.B %system
.RS
Percentage of CPU utilization that occurred while executing at the system
level (kernel). Note that this field includes time spent servicing
interrupts and softirqs.
.RE

.B %sys
.RS
Percentage of CPU utilization that occurred while executing at the system
level (kernel). Note that this field does NOT include time spent servicing
interrupts or softirqs.
.RE

.B %iowait
.RS
Percentage of time that the CPU or CPUs were idle during which
the system had an outstanding disk I/O request.
.RE

.B %steal
.RS
Percentage of time spent in involuntary wait by the virtual CPU
or CPUs while the hypervisor was servicing another virtual processor.
.RE

.B %irq
.RS
Percentage of time spent by the CPU or CPUs to service interrupts.
.RE

.B %soft
.RS
Percentage of time spent by the CPU or CPUs to service softirqs
(software interrupts).
.RE

.B %guest
.RS
Percentage of time spent by the CPU or CPUs to run a virtual processor.
.RE

.B %idle
.RS
Percentage of time that the CPU or CPUs were idle and the system
did not have an outstanding disk I/O request.
.RE

Note: On SMP machines a processor that does not have any activity at all
(0.00 for every field) is a disabled (offline) processor.
.RE
.IP -v
Report status of inode, file and other kernel tables.
The following values are displayed:

.B dentunusd
.RS
.RS
Number of unused cache entries in the directory cache.
.RE

.B file-nr
.RS
Number of file handles used by the system.
.RE

.B inode-nr
.RS
Number of inode handlers used by the system.
.RE

.B pty-nr
.RS
Number of pseudo-terminals used by the system.
.RE
.RE
.IP -V
Print version number then exit.
.IP -w
Report task creation and system switching activity.

.B proc/s
.RS
.RS
Total number of tasks created per second.
.RE

.B cswch/s
.RS
Total number of context switches per second.
.RE
.RE
.IP -W
Report swapping statistics. The following values are displayed:

.B pswpin/s
.RS
.RS
Total number of swap pages the system brought in per second.
.RE

.B pswpout/s
.RS
Total number of swap pages the system brought out per second.
.RE
.RE
.IP -y
Report TTY device activity. The following values are displayed:

.B rcvin/s
.RS
.RS
Number of receive interrupts per second for current serial line. Serial line number
is given in the TTY column.
.RE

.B xmtin/s
.RS
Number of transmit interrupts per second for current serial line.
.RE

.B framerr/s
.RS
Number of frame errors per second for current serial line.
.RE

.B prtyerr/s
.RS
Number of parity errors per second for current serial line.
.RE

.B brk/s
.RS
Number of breaks per second for current serial line.
.RE

.B ovrun/s
.RS
Number of overrun errors per second for current serial line.
.RE

Note that with recent 2.6 kernels, these statistics can be retrieved only by
root.
.RE

.SH ENVIRONMENT
The
.B sar
command takes into account the following environment variables:

.IP S_TIME_FORMAT
If this variable exists and its value is
.BR ISO
then the current locale will be ignored when printing the date in the report header.
The
.B sar
command will use the ISO 8601 format (YYYY-MM-DD) instead.

.IP S_TIME_DEF_TIME
If this variable exists and its value is
.BR UTC
then
.B sar
will save its data in UTC time (data will still be displayed in local time).
.B sar
will also use UTC time instead of local time to determine the current daily
data file located in the
.IR /var/log/sa
directory. This variable may be useful for servers with users located across
several timezones.
.SH EXAMPLES
.B sar -u 2 5
.RS
Report CPU utilization for each 2 seconds. 5 lines are displayed.
.RE

.B sar -I 14 -o int14.file 2 10
.RS
Report statistics on IRQ 14 for each 2 seconds. 10 lines are displayed.
Data are stored in a file called
.IR int14.file .
.RE

.B sar -r -n DEV -f /var/log/sa/sa16
.RS
Display memory and network statistics saved in daily data file 'sa16'.
.RE

.B sar -A
.RS
Display all the statistics saved in current daily data file.
.SH BUGS
.I /proc
filesystem must be mounted for the
.B sar
command to work.

All the statistics are not necessarily available, depending on the kernel version used.
.SH FILES
.IR /var/log/sa/sa dd
.RS
Indicate the daily data file, where the
.B dd
parameter is a number representing the day of the month.

.RE
.IR /proc
contains various files with system statistics.
.SH AUTHOR
Sebastien Godard (sysstat <at> orange.fr)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sadc (8),
.BR sa1 (8),
.BR sa2 (8),
.BR sadf (1),
.BR isag (1),
.BR pidstat (1),
.BR mpstat (1),
.BR iostat (1),
.BR vmstat (8)

.I http://pagesperso-orange.fr/sebastien.godard/
